## Version 4.0dev

### New features

#### Main Window

* Add a dark theme for the entire interface.
* Add a new `Plots` pane to browse all inline figures
  generated by the IPython console.
* Several plugins were renamed to have a simpler interface:
  - `Static code analysis` to `Code Analysis`
  - `File explorer` to `Files`
  - `Find in files` to `Find`
  - `History log` to `History`
  - `Project explorer` to `Project`
* Add a new action called `Undock` to the Options menu of
  every plugin. This action creates a separate window that
  only contains the plugin and can be moved to a different
  place of the screen or to a different monitor.
* Add a clock to the status bar, for those who like to work
  on full screen mode. It can be activated in
  `Preferences > General > Advanced settings > Status bar > Show clock`.
* Add translation for Simplified Chinese.

#### Editor

* Add code folding functionality.
* Show code completions as you type.
* Add autosave functionality to be able to recover unsaved files
  after a crash.
* Add indentation guides. They can be activated under the
  `Source` menu.
* Add a panel to show the current class and method/function
  where the cursor is placed, inspired by similar 
  functionality present in Microsoft Visual Studio. 
  It can activated under the `Source` menu.
* Allow setting multiple line length indicators under
  `Preferences > Editor > Display > Show vertical lines`.
* Add `Ctrl+Alt+Shift+,` and `Ctrl+Alt+Shift+.` shortcuts 
  to go to the previous/next warning and error, respectively.
* Allow scrolling past the end of the file. 
  This can activated in
  `Preferences > Editor > Display > Scroll past the end`.
* Add the ability to take into account code indentation and
  PEP 8 when adding and removing comment levels.
* Add an option to convert end-of-line characters on save.
* Add `Ctrl+{` and `Ctrl+_` shortcuts to split panels 
  vertically and horizontally, respectively.
* Add `Alt+Shift+W` shortcut to close the current split panel.
* After pressing a quote or brace the current selection gets
  enclosed on it.
* Add automatic docstring generation (parameters, return vals
  and exceptions raised) in Numpydoc and Googledoc formats.
* Add an option to its context menu to sort files alphabetically.
* Add the ability to reference issues on Gitlab (`gl`), Github
  (`gh`) and Bitbucket (`bb`) in comments or strings by using
  the convention `{gl/gh/bb}:my-org/my-repo#123`. You can also
  reference them by `{gl/gh/bb}-123`, if you previously set up
  an `upstream` or `origin` remote in your repo.
* Use the Language Server Protocol for code completion and linting.

#### IPython console
* Files are now run in an empty namespace. This avoids picking up
  variables defined in the console while running a file. To get
  the previous behavior you need to go to the menu
  `Run > Configuration per file` and activate the option called
  `Run in console’s namespace instead of an empty one`.
* Add menu options to start consoles in Pylab, Sympy and Cython
  modes.
* Run cells through a function called `runcell` instead of
  pasting their contents directly to the console.
* Use Jupyter comms to handle communications between frontend
  and kernel.

#### Debugger

* Add code completion to it.
* Add the ability to execute multi-line statements on it.
* Add syntax highlighting to it and color `ipdb` prompts.
* Add permanent history to it, separate from the console
  history.
* `runfile` and `runcell` can now be called when the debugger
  is active.
* Add the ability to debug cells by pressing `Alt+Shift+Return`
  or by going to the menu `Debug > Debug cell`.
* Add an option to ignore installed Python libraries while
  debugging. It can be turned on in the menu
  `Debug > Ignore Python libraries while debugging`.
* Add the ability to see inline plots while debugging. For that
  you need to activate the option called
  `Process execute events while debugging`, present in in the
  `Debug` menu.
* Disambiguate file names in the Breakpoints pane.

#### Variable Explorer

* Add a new viewer to inspect any Python object in a tree-like
  view.
* Add the ability to search for variable names and types.
* Restore the ability to refresh it while code is being
  executed.
* Add support for Numpy object arrays.
* Add MultiIndex display support to the DataFrame viewer.
* Add support for all Pandas indexes.
* Add support for sets.
* Add a new option to exclude callables and modules.
* Add an option to its context menu (the one you get with a
  mouse right-click) to resize columns to its contents.

#### Files

* Add the possibility to associate different external
  applications to open specific file extensions (e.g.
  `.txt` files with Notepad++ or VSCode).
* Add a context menu action called `Open externally` to all
  files to open them with the Operating System default
  program associated with the file type.
* Add multi-select functionality (`Ctrl/Shift+click`).
* Add the ability to copy/paste files and their absolute or
  relative paths.
* Use special icons for different file types.
* Add an option to open files and directories with a single
  click.

#### Outline

* Show cells grouped in sections. Level 1 cells are defined by
  `#%%` (as before), level 2 cells by `#%%%`, level 3 cells by
  `#%%%%` and so on. With this new syntax, all  `n+1` cells
  will be conveniently grouped under n-level cells in the 
  outline tree.
* Add an option to sort files alphabetically. By default files
  are shown in the same order as in the Editor.
* Add a default name for cells to encourage users to name them.
  This way cells can be more easily spotted in the outline tree.

#### Preferences:

* Spyder can now read default configuration options saved in
`spyder.ini` files from system (e.g. `/etc/spyder`) and
conda environment (e.g. `~/miniconda/envs/py36/etc/spyder`)
directories. This can be used by sysadmins to turn on/off certain
options by default for all users in an organization. To
inspect the paths from which Spyder reads these files per
operating system and the order in which it does that, you can use
the new command line option `spyder --paths`.

#### API Changes

##### Major changes
* Create one module per plugin in `spyder.plugins` and move
  there all widgets and utility modules used by that plugin.
  For example, `spyder.widgets.sourcecode.codeeditor` is now at
  `spyder.plugins.editor.widgets.codeeditor`.
* Create the `spyder.api` module to expose a public API
  for external plugins.
* Add a `SpyderPlugin` class to be able to create plugins without
  an associated graphical pane.

##### Minor changes
* Remove the `SpyderPluginMixin` class. 
  Its contents were added to `BasePluginMixin` and
  `BasePluginWidgetMixin` (in `plugins/base.py`).
* Move `SpyderDockWidget` to `widgets/dock.py`.
* Config pages of all plugins are now located in a separate module
  called `spyder/plugins/<plugin>/confpage.py`

#### Under the hood
* Drop support for Python 3.4.
* Increase minimal PyQt supported version to 5.6.
* Deprecate the usage of `debug_print` and use the `logging` module
  instead.